# Replication Internals

Replication is the set of systems used to continuously copy data from a primary server to secondary
servers so if the primary server fails a secondary server can take over soon. This process is
intended to be mostly transparent to the user, with drivers taking care of routing queries to the
requested replica. Replication in MongoDB is facilitated through [**replica
sets**](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/replication/).

Replica sets are a group of nodes with one primary and multiple secondaries. The primary is
responsible for all writes. Users may specify that reads from secondaries are acceptable with a
`slaveOK` flag, but they are not by default.

# Steady State Replication

The normal running of a replica set is referred to as steady state replication. This is when there
is one primary and multiple secondaries. Each secondary is replicating data from the primary, or
another secondary off of which it is **chaining**.

## Life as a Primary

### Doing a Write

When a user does a write, all a primary node does is apply the write to the database like a
standalone would. The one difference from a standalone write is that replica set nodes have an
`OpObserver` that inserts a document to the **oplog** whenever a write to the database happens,
describing the write. The oplog is a capped collection called `oplog.rs` in the `local` database.
There are a few optimizations made for it in WiredTiger, and it is the only collection that doesn't
include an _id field.

If a write does multiple operations, each will have its own oplog entry; for example, inserts with
implicit collection creation create two oplog entries, one for the `create` and one for the
`insert`.

These entries are rewritten from the initial operation to make them idempotent; for example, updates
with `$inc` are changed to use `$set`.

Secondaries drive oplog replication via a pull process.

Writes can also specify a [**write
concern**](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/write-concern/). If a command includes a write
concern, the command will just block in its own thread until the oplog entries it generates have
been replicated to the requested number of nodes. The primary keeps track of how up-to-date the
secondaries are to know when to return. A write concern can specify a number of nodes to wait for,
or **majority**. If **majority** is specified, the write waits for that write to be in the
**committed snapshot** as well, so that it can be read with `readConcern: { level: majority }`
reads. (If this last sentence made no sense, come back to it at the end).

## Life as a Secondary

In general, secondaries just choose a node to sync from, their **sync source**, and then pull
operations from its oplog and apply those oplog entries to their own copy of the data on disk.

Secondaries also constantly update their sync source with their progress so that the primary can
satisfy write concerns.

### Oplog Fetching

A secondary keeps its data synchronized with its sync source by fetching oplog entries from its sync
source. This is done via the
[`OplogFetcher`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/oplog_fetcher.h).

The `OplogFetcher` first sends a `find` command to the sync source's oplog, and then follows with a
series of `getMore`s on the cursor.

The `OplogFetcher` makes use of the
[`Fetcher`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/client/fetcher.h) for this task,
which is a generic class used for fetching data from a collection on a remote node. A `Fetcher` is
given a `find` command and then follows that command with `getMore` requests. The `Fetcher` also
takes in a callback function that is called with the results of every batch.

Let’s refer to the sync source as node A and the fetching node as node B.

The `find` command that B’s `OplogFetcher` first sends to sync source A has a greater than or equal
predicate on the timestamp of the last oplog entry it has fetched. The original `find` command
should always return at least 1 document due to the greater than or equal predicate. If it does not,
that means that the A’s oplog is behind B's and thus A should not be B’s sync source. If it does
return a non-empty batch, but the first document returned does not match the last entry in B’s
oplog, that means that B's oplog has diverged from A's and it should go into
[**ROLLBACK**](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/replica-set-rollbacks/).

After getting the original `find` response, secondaries check the metadata that accompanies the
response to see if the sync source is still a good sync source. Secondaries check that the node has
not rolled back since it was chosen and that it is still ahead of them.

The `OplogFetcher` uses **long-polling**. It specifies `awaitData: true, tailable: true` so that the
`getMore`s block until their `maxTimeMS` expires waiting for more data instead of returning
immediately. If there is no data to return at the end of `maxTimeMS`, the `OplogFetcher` receives an
empty batch and simply issues another `getMore`.

If any fetch requests have an error, then the `OplogFetcher` creates a new `Fetcher`. It restarts
the `Fetcher` with a new `find` command each time it receives an error for a maximum of 3 retries.
If it expires its retries then the `OplogFetcher` shuts down with an error status.

The `OplogFetcher` is owned by the
[`BackgroundSync`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/bgsync.h) thread.
The `BackgroundSync` thread runs continuously while a node is in SECONDARY state. `BackgroundSync`
sits in a loop, where each iteration it first chooses a sync source with the `SyncSourceResolver`
and then starts up the `OplogFetcher`. When the `OplogFetcher` terminates, `BackgroundSync` restarts
sync source selection, exits, or goes into ROLLBACK depending on the return status. The
`OplogFetcher` could terminate because the first batch implies that a rollback is required, it could
receive an error from the sync source, or it could just be shut down by its owner, such as when
`BackgroundSync` itself is shut down.

The `OplogFetcher` does not directly apply the operations it retrieves from the sync source. Rather,
it puts them into a buffer (the **`OplogBuffer`**) and another thread is in charge of taking the
operations off the buffer and applying them. That buffer uses an in-memory blocking queue for steady
state replication; there is a similar collection-backed buffer used for initial sync.

### Sync Source Selection

Whenever a node starts initial sync, creates a new `BackgroundSync` (when it stops being primary),
or errors on its current `OplogFetcher`, it must get a new sync source. Sync source selection is
done by the
[`SyncSourceResolver`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/sync_source_resolver.h).

The `SyncSourceResolver` delegates the duty of choosing a "sync source candidate" to the
[**`ReplicationCoordinator`**](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/replication_coordinator.h),
which in turn asks the
[**`TopologyCoordinator`**](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/topology_coordinator.h)
to choose a new sync source.

#### Choosing a sync source candidate

To choose a new sync source candidate, the `TopologyCoordinator` first checks if the user requested
a specific sync source with the `replSetSyncFrom` command. In that case, the secondary chooses that
host as the sync source and resets its state so that it doesn’t use that requested sync source
again.

If **chaining** is disallowed, the secondary needs to sync from the primary, and chooses it as a
candidate.

Otherwise, it iterates through all of the nodes and sees which one is the best.

* First the secondary checks the `TopologyCoordinator`'s cached view of the replica set for the
  latest OpTime known to be on the primary. Secondaries do not sync from nodes whose newest oplog
  entry is more than
  [`maxSyncSourceLagSecs`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/topology_coordinator_impl.cpp#L227-L240)
  seconds behind the primary's newest oplog entry.
* Secondaries then loop through each node and choose the closest node that satisfies [various
  criteria](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/topology_coordinator_impl.cpp#L162-L363).
  “Closest” here is determined by the lowest ping time to each node.
* If no node satisfies the necessary criteria, then the `BackgroundSync` waits 1 second and restarts
  the sync source selection process.

#### Sync Source Probing

After choosing a sync source candidate, the `SyncSourceResolver` probes the sync source candidate to
make sure it actually is able to fetch from the sync source candidate’s oplog.

* If the sync source candidate has no oplog or there is an error, the secondary blacklists that sync
  source for some time and then tries to find a new sync source candidate.
* If the oldest entry in the sync source candidate's oplog is newer than the node's newest entry,
  then the node blacklists that sync source candidate as well because the candidate is too far
  ahead.
* During initial sync, rollback, or recovery from unclean shutdown, nodes will set a specific
  OpTime, **`minValid`**, that they must reach before it is safe to read from the node and before
  the node can transition into SECONDARY state. If the secondary has a `minValid`, then the sync
  source candidate is checked for that `minValid` entry.
* The sync source's **RollbackID** is also fetched to be checked after the first batch is returned
  by the `OplogFetcher`.

If the secondary is too far behind all possible sync source candidates then it goes into maintenance
mode and waits for manual intervention (likely a call to `resync`). If no viable candidates were
found, `BackgroundSync` waits 1 second and attempts the entire sync source selection process again.
Otherwise, the secondary found a sync source! At that point `BackgroundSync` starts an OplogFetcher.

### Oplog Entry Application

A separate thread,
[`RSDataSync`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/rs_sync.h) is used for
pulling oplog entries off of the oplog buffer and applying them. `RSDataSync` constructs a
[`SyncTail`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/sync_tail.h) in a loop
which is used to actually apply the operations. The `SyncTail` instance does some oplog application,
and terminates when there is a state change where we need to pause oplog application. After it
terminates, `RSDataSync` loops back and decides if it should make a new `SyncTail` and continue.

`SyncTail` creates multiple threads that apply buffered oplog entries in parallel. Operations are
pulled off of the oplog buffer in batches to be applied. Nodes keep track of their “last applied
OpTime”, which is only moved forward at the end of a batch. Oplog entries within the same batch are
not necessarily applied in order. Operations on a document must be atomic and ordered, so operations
on the same document will be put on the same thread to be serialized. Additionally, command
operations are done serially in batches of size 1. Insert operations are also batched together for
improved performance.

## Replication and Topology Coordinators

The `ReplicationCoordinator` is the public api that replication presents to the rest of the code
base. It is in charge of coordinating the interaction of replication with the rest of the system.

The `ReplicationCoordinator` communicates with the storage layer and other nodes through the
[`ReplicationCoordinatorExternalState`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/replication_coordinator_external_state.h).
The external state also manages and owns all of the replication threads.

The `TopologyCoordinator` is in charge of maintaining state about the topology of the cluster. It is
non-blocking and does a large amount of a node's decision making surrounding replication. Most
replication command requests and responses are filled in here.

Both coordinators maintain views of the entire cluster and the state of each node, though there are
plans to merge these together.

## Communication

Each node has a copy of the **`ReplicaSetConfig`** in the `ReplicationCoordinator` that lists all
nodes in the replica set. This config lets each node talk to every other node.

Each node uses the internal client, the legacy c++ driver code in the
[`src/mongo/client`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/tree/r3.4.2/src/mongo/client) directory, to
talk to each other node. Nodes talk to each other by sending a mixture of external and internal
commands over the same incoming port as user commands. All commands take the same code path as
normal user commands. For security, nodes use the keyfile to authenticate to each other. You need to
be the system user to run replication commands, so nodes authenticate as the system user when
issuing remote commands to other nodes.

Each node communicates with other nodes at regular intervals to:

* Check the liveness of the other nodes (heartbeats)
* Stay up to date with the primary (oplog fetching)
* Update their sync source with their progress (`replSetUpdatePosition` commands)

Each oplog entry is assigned an `OpTime` to describe when it occurred so other nodes can compare how
up-to-date they are.

OpTimes include a timestamp and a term field. The term field indicates how many elections have
occurred since the replica set started.

The election protocol, known as
[protocol version 1 or PV1](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/replica-set-protocol-versions/),
is built on top of [Raft](https://raft.github.io/raft.pdf), so it is guaranteed that two primaries
will not be elected in the same term. This helps differentiate ops that occurred at the same time
but from different primaries in the case of a network partition.

### Oplog Fetcher Responses

The `OplogFetcher` just issues normal `find` and `getMore` commands, so the upstream node (the sync
source) does not get any information from the request. In the response, however, the downstream
node, the one that issues the `find` to its sync source, gets metadata that it uses to update its
view of the replica set.

There are two types of metadata, `ReplSetMetadata` and `OplogQueryMetadata`. (The
`OplogQueryMetadata` is new, so there is some temporary field duplication for backwards
compatibility.)

#### ReplSetMetadata

`ReplSetMetadata` comes with all replication commands and is processed similarly for all commands.
It includes:

1. The upstream node's last committed OpTime
2. The current term.
3. The `ReplicaSetConfig` version (this is used to determine if a reconfig has occurred on the
   upstream node that hasn't been registered by the downstream node yet).
4. The replica set ID.

If the metadata has a different config version than the downstream node's config version, then the
metadata is ignored until a reconfig command is received that synchronizes the config versions.

The node sets its term to the upstream node's term, and if it's a primary (which can only happen on
heartbeats), it steps down.

The last committed OpTime is only used in this metadata for
[arbiters](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/core/replica-set-arbiter/), to advance their committed
OpTime and in sharding in some places. Otherwise it is ignored.

#### OplogQueryMetadata

`OplogQueryMetadata` only comes with `OplogFetcher` responses. It includes:

1. The upstream node's last committed OpTime. This is the most recent operation that would be
   reflected in the snapshot used for `readConcern: majority` reads.
2. The upstream node's last applied OpTime.
3. The index (as specified by the `ReplicaSetConfig`) of the node that the upstream node thinks is
   primary.
4. The index of the upstream node's sync source.

If the metadata says there is still a primary, the downstream node resets its election timeout into
the future.

The downstream node sets its last committed OpTime to the last committed OpTime of the upstream
node.

When it updates the last committed OpTime, it chooses a new committed snapshot if possible and tells
the storage engine to erase any old ones if necessary.

Before sending the next `getMore`, the downstream node uses the metadata to check if it should
change sync sources.

### Heartbeats

At a default of every 2 seconds, the `HeartbeatInterval`, every node sends a heartbeat to every
other node with the `replSetHeartbeat` command. This means that the number of heartbeats increases
quadratically with the number of nodes and is the reasoning behind the 50 member limit in a replica
set. The data, `ReplSetHeartbeatArgsV1` that accompanies every heartbeat is:

1. `ReplicaSetConfig` version
2. The id of the sender in the `ReplSetConfig`
3. Term
4. Replica set name
5. Sender host address

When the remote node receives the heartbeat, it first processes the heartbeat data, and then sends a
response back. First, the remote node makes sure the heartbeat is compatible with its replica set
name and its `ReplicaSetConfig` version and otherwise sends an error.

The receiving node's `TopologyCoordinator` updates the last time it received a heartbeat from the
sending node for liveness checking in its `MemberHeartbeatData` list.

If the sending node's config is higher than the receiving node's, then the receiving node schedules
a heartbeat to get the config. The receiving node's `ReplicationCoordinator` also updates its
`SlaveInfo` with the last update from the sending node and marks it as being up.

It then creates a `ReplSetHeartbeatResponse` object. This includes:

1. Replica set name
2. The receiving node's election time
3. The receiving node's last applied OpTime
4. The receiving node's last durable OpTime
5. The node the receiving node thinks is primary
6. The term of the receiving node
7. The state of the receiving node
8. The receiving node's sync source
9. The receiving node's `ReplicaSetConfig` version

When the sending node receives the response to the heartbeat, it first processes its
`ReplSetMetadata` like before.

The sending node postpones its election timeout if it sees a primary.

The `TopologyCoordinator` updates its `HeartbeatData`. It marks if the receiving node is up or down.

The sending node's `TopologyCoordinator` then looks at the response and decides the next action to
take: no action, priority takeover, or reconfig,

The `ReplicationCoordinator` then updates the `SlaveInfo` for the receiving node with its most
recently acquired OpTimes.

If the sending node is primary, this updates the commit point if the sending node sees that a
majority of its nodes have reached a newer OpTime. Any threads blocking on a writeConcern are woken
up to check if they now fulfill their requested writeConcern.

The next heartbeat is scheduled and then the next action set by the `TopologyCoordinator` is
executed.

If the action was a priority takeover, then the node ranks all of the priorities in its config and
assigns itself a priority takeover timeout proportional to its rank. After that timeout expires the
node will check if it's eligible to run for election and if so will begin an election. The timeout
is simply: `(election timeout) * (priority rank + 1)`.

### Update Position Commands

The last way that replica set nodes regularly communicate with each other is through
`replSetUpdatePosition` commands. The `ReplicationCoordinatorExternalState` creates a
[**`SyncSourceFeedback`**](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/sync_source_feedback.h)
object at startup that is responsible for sending `replSetUpdatePosition` commands.

The `SyncSourceFeedback` starts a loop. In each iteration it first waits on a condition variable
that is notified whenever the `ReplicationCoordinator` discovers that a node in the replica set has
replicated more operations and become more up-to-date. It checks that it is not in PRIMARY or
STARTUP state before moving on.

It then gets the node's sync source and creates a
[**`Reporter`**](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/reporter.h) that
actually sends the `replSetUpdatePosition` command to the sync source. This command keeps getting
sent every `keepAliveInterval` milliseconds (`(electionTimeout / 2)`) to maintain liveness
information about the nodes in the replica set.

`replSetUpdatePosition` commands are the primary means of maintaining liveness. Thus, if the primary
cannot communicate directly with every node, but it can communicate with every node through other
nodes, it will still stay primary.

The `replSetUpdatePosition` command contains the following information:

1. An `optimes` array containing an object for each live replica set member. This information is
   filled in by the `ReplicationCoordinator` with information from its `SlaveInfo`. Nodes that are
   believed to be down are not included. Each node contains:

    1. last durable OpTime
    2. last applied OpTime
    3. memberId
    4. `ReplicaSetConfig` version

2. `ReplSetMetadata`. Usually this only comes in responses, but here it comes in the request as
   well.

When a node receives a `replSetUpdatePosition` command, the first thing it does is have the
`ReplicationCoordinator` process the `ReplSetMetadata` as before.

For every node’s OpTime data in the `optimes` array, the receiving node updates its view of the
replicaset in the replication and topology coordinators. This updates the liveness information of
every node in the `optimes` list. If the data is about the receiving node, it ignores it. If the
`ReplSetConfig` versions don’t match, it errors. If the receiving node is a primary and it learns
that the commit point should be moved forward, it does so.

If something has changed and the receiving node itself has a sync source, it forwards its new
information to its own sync source.

The `replSetUpdatePosition` command response does not include any information unless there is an
error, such as in a `ReplSetConfig` mismatch.

## Read Concern

MongoDB does not provide snapshot isolation. All reads in MongoDB are executed on snapshots of the
data taken at some point in time; however if the storage engine yields while executing a read, the
read may continue on a newer snapshot. Thus, reads are currently never guaranteed to return all data
from one point in time. This means that some documents can be skipped if they are updated and any
updates that occurred since the read began may or may not be seen.

[Read concern](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/read-concern/) is an option sent with any
read command to specify at what consistency level the read should be satisfied. There are 3 read
concern levels:

* Local
* Majority
* Linearizable

**Local** just returns whatever the most up-to-date data is on the node. It does this by reading
from the storage engine’s most recent snapshot(s).

**Majority** uses the last committed snapshot(s) to do its read. The data read only reflects the
oplog entries that have been replicated to a majority of nodes in the replica set. Any data seen in
majority reads cannot roll back in the future. Thus majority reads prevent **dirty reads**, though
they often are **stale reads**.

Read concern majority reads usually return as fast as local reads, but sometimes will block. Read
concern majority reads do not wait for anything to be committed; they just use different snapshots
from local reads. They do block though when the node metadata (in the catalog cache) differs from
the committed snapshot. For example, index builds or drops, collection creates or drops, database
drops, or collmod’s could cause majority reads to block. If the primary receives a `createIndex`
command, subsequent majority reads will block until that index build is finished on a majority of
nodes. Majority reads also block right after startup or rollback when we do not yet have a committed
snapshot.

MongoDB continuously directs the storage engine to take named snapshots. Reads with read concern
level local are executed on “unnamed snapshots,” which are ephemeral and exist only long enough to
satisfy the read transaction. As a node discovers that its writes have been replicated to
secondaries, it updates its committed OpTime. The newest named snapshot older than the commit point
becomes the new "committed snapshot" used for read majority reads. Any named snapshots older than
the "committed snapshot" are then cleaned up (deleted). MongoDB tells WiredTiger to save up to 1000
named snapshots at a time. If the commit point doesn't move, but writes continue to happen, we will
keep taking more snapshots and may hit the limit. Afterwards, no further snapshots are created until
the commit point moves and old snapshots are deleted. The commit level might not move if you are
doing w:1 writes with an arbiter, for example. If we hit the limit, but continue to take writes, we
may create a large gap across the oplog entries where there is no associated named snapshot. When
the commit point begins to move forward again and we start deleting old snapshots again, the next
snapshots will occur at the most recent OpTime and not be able to fill in the gap. In this case,
once the commit point moves ahead into the gap, the committed snapshot will remain before the gap,
and majority reads will read increasingly stale data until the commit point gets to the end of the
gap. To reduce the chance of hitting the snapshot limit and this happening, we slow down the
frequency with which we mark snapshots as “named snapshots” as we get closer to the limit.

**Linearizable** read concern actually does block for some time. Linearizability guarantees that if
one thread does a write that is acknowledged and tells another thread about that write, then that
second thread should see the write. If you transiently have 2 primaries (one has yet to step down)
and you read the data from the old primary, the new one may have newer data and you may get a stale
read.

To prevent reading from stale primaries, reads block to ensure that the current node remains the
primary after the read is complete. Nodes just write a noop to the oplog and wait for it to be
replicated to a majority of nodes. The node reads data from the most recent snapshot, and then the
noop write occurs after the fact. Thus, since we wait for the noop write to be replicated to a
majority of nodes, linearizable reads satisfy all of the same guarantees of read concern majority,
and then some. Linearizable read concern reads are only done on the primary, and they only apply to
single document reads, since linearizability is only defined as a property on single objects.

**afterOpTime** is another read concern option, only used internally, only for config servers as
replica sets. **Read after optime** means that the read will block until the node has replicated
writes after a certain OpTime. This means that if read concern local is specified it will wait until
the local snapshot is beyond the specified OpTime. If read concern majority is specified it will
wait until the committed snapshot is beyond the specified OpTime. In 3.6 this feature will be
extended to support a sharded cluster and use a **Lamport Clock** to provide **causal consistency**.

# Elections

## Step Up

A node runs for election when it does a priority takeover or when it doesn't see a primary within
the election timeout.

#### Candidate Perspective

A candidate node first runs a dry-run election. In a **dry-run election**, a node sends out
`replSetRequestVotes` commands to every node asking if that node would vote for it, but the
candidate node does not increase its term. If a primary ever sees a higher term than its own, it
steps down. By first conducting a dry-run election, we prevent nodes from increasing their own term
when they would not win and prevent needless primary stepdowns. If the node fails the dry-run
election, it just continues replicating as normal. If the node wins the dry-run election, it begins
a real election.

In the real election, the node first increments its term and votes for itself. It then starts a
[`VoteRequester`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/vote_requester.h),
which uses a
[`ScatterGatherRunner`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/scatter_gather_runner.h)
to send a `replSetRequestVotes` command to every single node. Each node then decides if it should
vote "aye" or "nay" and responds to the candidate with their vote. When nodes respond, the
`ReplicationCoordinator` updates its `SlaveInfo` map to say that those nodes are still up for
liveness information. The candidate node must be at least as up to date as a majority of voting
members in order to get elected.

If the candidate received votes from a majority of nodes, including itself, the candidate wins the
election.

#### Voter Perspective

When a node receives a `replSetRequestVotes` command, it first checks if the term is up to date and
updates its own term accordingly. The `ReplicationCoordinator` then asks the `TopologyCoordinator`
if it should grant a vote. The vote is rejected if:

1. It's from an older term.
2. The config versions do not match.
3. The replica set name does not match.
4. The last committed OpTime that comes in the vote request is older than the voter's last applied
   OpTime.
5. If it's not a dry-run election and the voter has already voted in this term.
6. If the voter is an arbiter and it can see a healthy primary of greater or equal priority. This is
   to prevent primary flapping when there are two nodes that can't talk to each other and an arbiter
   that can talk to both.

Whenever a node votes for itself, or another node, it records that "LastVote" information durably to
the `local.replset.election` collection. This information is read into memory at startup and used in
future elections. This ensures that even if a node restarts, it does not vote for two nodes in the
same term.

#### Transitioning to PRIMARY

Now that the candidate has won, it must become PRIMARY. First it notifies all nodes that it won the
election via a round of heartbeats. Then the node checks if it needs to catch up from the former
primary. Since the node can be elected without the former primary's vote, the primary-elect will
attempt to replicate any remaining oplog entries it has not yet replicated from any viable sync
source. While these are guaranteed to not be committed, it is still good to minimize rollback when
possible.

The primary-elect uses the
[`FreshnessScanner`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/freshness_scanner.h)
to send a `replSetGetStatus` request to every other node to see the last applied OpTime of every
other node. If the primary-elect’s last applied OpTime is less than the newest last applied OpTime
it sees, it will schedule a timer for the catchup-timeout. If that timeout expires or if the node
reaches the old primary's last applied OpTime, then the node ends catch-up phase. The node then
stops the `OplogFetcher`.

At this point the node goes into "drain mode". This is when the node has already logged "transition
to PRIMARY", but has not yet applied all of the oplog entries in its oplog buffer.
`replSetGetStatus` will now say the node is in PRIMARY state. The applier keeps running, and when it
completely drains the buffer, it signals to the `ReplicationCoordinator` to finish the step up
process. The node marks that it can begin to accept writes. According to the Raft Protocol, no oplog
entries from previous terms can be committed until an oplog entry in the current term is committed.
The node now writes a "new primary" noop oplog entry so that it can commit older writes as soon as
possible. Finally, the node drops all temporary collections and logs “transition to primary
complete”.

## Step Down

When a `replSetStepDown` command comes in, the node begins to check if it can step down. First, the
node kills all user operations and they return an error to the user. Then the node loops trying to
step down. It repeatedly checks if a majority of nodes are caught up and if one of those caught up
nodes is electable or if the user requested it to force a stepdown. It then begins to step down.

Stepdowns also occur if a primary sees a higher term than themselves or if a primary stops being
able to transitively communicate with a majority of nodes. The primary does not need to be able to
communicate directly with a majority of nodes. If primary A can’t communicate with node B, but A can
communicate with C which can communicate with B, that is okay. If you consider the minimum spanning
tree on the cluster where edges are connections from nodes to their sync source, then as long as the
primary is connected to a majority of nodes, it will stay primary.

Once the node begins to step down, it first sets its state to `follower` in the
`TopologyCoordinator`. It then transitioning to SECONDARY in the `ReplicationCoordinator`.

# Rollback

Rollback is the process whereby a node that diverges from its sync source undoes the divergent
operations and gets back to a consistent point.

This can occur if there is a partition in the network for some time and a node runs for election
because it doesn't hear from the primary. There will be some time with 2 primaries and in this time
both can take writes. When the partition is healed, the smaller half of the partition may have to
roll back its changes and roll forward to match the other one.

Nodes go into rollback if after they receive the first batch of writes from their sync source, they
realize that the greater than or equal to predicate did not return the last op in their oplog. When
rolling back, nodes are in the `ROLLBACK` state and reads are prohibited. When a node goes into
rollback it drops all snapshots.

The rolling-back node first finds the common point between its oplog and its sync source's oplog. It
then goes through all of the operations in its oplog back to the common point and figures out how to
undo them.

Simply doing the "inverse" operation is sometimes impossible, such as a document remove where we do
not log the entire document that is removed. Instead, the node simply refetches the problematic
documents, or entire collections in the case of undoing a `drop`, from the sync source and replaces
the local version with that version. Some operations also have special handling, and some just fail,
such as `dropDatabase`, causing the entire node to shut down.

The node first compiles a list of documents, collections, and indexes to fetch and drop. Before
actually doing the undo steps, the node "fixes up" the operations by "cancelling out" operations
that negate each other to reduce work. The node then drops and fetches all data it needs and
replaces the local version with the remote versions.

The node gets the last applied OpTime from the sync source and the Rollback ID to check if a
rollback has happened during this rollback, in which case it fails rollback and shuts down. The last
applied OpTime is set as the `minValid` for the node and the node goes into RECOVERING state. The
node resumes fetching and applying operations like a normal secondary until it hits that `minValid`.
Only at that point does the node go into SECONDARY state.

This process is very similar to initial sync and startup after an unclean shutdown in that
operations are applied on data that may already reflect those operations and operations in the
future. This leads to all of the same idempotency concerns and index constraint relaxation.

This code is about to change radically in version 3.6.

# Initial Sync

Initial sync is the process that we use to add a new node to a replica set. Initial sync is
initiated by the `ReplicationCoordinator` and done in the
[**`DataReplicator`**](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/data_replicator.h).
When a node begins initial sync or `resync` is called, it goes into `STARTUP2` state. `STARTUP` is
reserved for the time before initial sync when a node may need to recover from unclean shutdown.

The `DataReplicator` first gets a sync source. Second, the node drops all of its data except for the
local database and recreates the oplog. It then gets the Rollback ID from the sync source to ensure
at the end that no rollbacks occurred during initial sync. Finally, it creates an `OplogFetcher` and
starts fetching and buffering oplog entries from the sync source to be applied later. Operations are
buffered to a collection so that they are not limited by the amount of memory available.

#### Data clone phase

The new node then begins to clone data from its sync source. The `DataReplicator` constructs a
[`DatabasesCloner`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/databases_cloner.h)
that's used to clone all of the databases on the upstream node. The `DatabasesCloner` asks the sync
source for a list of its databases and then for each one it creates a
[`DatabaseCloner`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/database_cloner.h)
to clone that database. Each `DatabaseCloner` asks the sync source for a list of its collections and
then creates a
[`CollectionCloner`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/collection_cloner.h)
to clone that collection. The `CollectionCloner` calls `listIndexes` on the sync source and creates
a
[`CollectionBulkLoader`](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/blob/r3.4.2/src/mongo/db/repl/collection_bulk_loader.h)
to create all of the indexes in parallel with the data cloning. The `CollectionCloner` then just
runs `find` and `getMore` requests on the sync source repeatedly, inserting the fetched documents
each time, until it fetches all of the documents.

#### Oplog application phase

After the cloning phase of initial sync has finished, the oplog application phase begins. The new
node first asks its sync source for its last applied OpTime and this is saved as `minValid`, the
oplog entry it must apply before it's consistent and can become a secondary.

The new node iterates through all of the buffered operations and applies them to the data on disk.
Oplog entries continue to be fetched and added to the buffer while this is occurring.

If an error occurs on application of an entry, it retries the operation by fetching the entire
document from the source and just replacing the local document with that one. The last applied
OpTime is again fetched from the sync source and `minValid` is pushed back to this new OpTime. This
can occur if a document that needs to be updated was deleted before it was cloned, so the `update`
op refers to a document that does not exist on the initial syncing node.

#### Idempotency concerns

Some of the operations that are applied may already be reflected in the data that was cloned since
we started buffering oplog entries before the collection cloning phase even started. Consider the
following:

1. Start buffering oplog entries
2. Insert `{a: 1, b: 1}` to collection `foo`
3. Insert `{a: 1, b: 2}` to collection `foo`
5. Drop collection `foo`
6. Recreate collection `foo`
7. Create unique index on field `a` in collection `foo`
8. Clone collection `foo`
9. Start applying oplog entries and try to insert both `{a: 1, b: 1}` and `{a: 1, b: 2}`

As seen here, there can be operations on collections that have since been dropped or indexes could
conflict with the data being added. As a result, many errors that occur here are ignored and assumed
to resolve themselves. If known problematic operations such as `renameCollection` are received,
where we cannot assume a drop will come and fix them, we abort and retry initial sync.

#### Finishing initial sync

The oplog application phase concludes when the node applies `minValid`. The node checks its sync
source's Rollback ID to see if a rollback occurred and if so, restarts initial sync. Otherwise, the
`DataReplicator` shuts down and the `ReplicationCoordinator` starts steady state replication.
